As an example of the use of this theorem consider the tables that have been given
in this chapter. In this chapter we use active operators and tabulate base functions
for various matrix representations that are also tabulated in full. If one is using
passive operators then one can use the same base functions provided one takes as
matrix representatives the inverses of those tabulated. That is to say, one writes X
(and means Xp) where we write X (and mean Xa). The multiplication table includes
YX = Z (meaning YpXp = Zp) in place of our multiplication table that includes
XY = Z (meaning XaYa = Z0). <$j| is a basis for a representation Fj, and
D'WD^X) = D;(Z) (meaning Dj,( Yp}Wp(Xp) 
= Dj,(Zp)) and we will have written
the same basis <<$ for a representation F^ and Dl(X)Dl(Y) 
= D'(Z) (meaning
Dfl(*"a)Dfl(7a) = Da(ZJ); the relation between the matrices of Fj, and FP is DP(Jf) =
DiCA""1) = {D&O} 
• We add one final word of warning: if D^) and DP(Jrp)
have different characters then the representations labelled by i, FP and Fa, will have
different labels in the character table although the base functions are the same.
2.6. Symmetrized and anti-symmetrized products of point-group reps
To conclude this chapter we give a brief account of the symmetrized and anti-sym-
metrized products of point-group reps. These products are of interest in their own
right, for example, in connection with molecular vibrations (Jahn and Teller 1937) or
with the Landau theory of second-order phase transitions (see, for example, Birman
(19666), Indenbom (1960a), Landau and Lifshitz (19586), Lyubarskii (I960)). In
addition to this, a study of these products for point-group reps forms a simple intro-
duction to the work on symmetrized and anti-symmetrized products of space-group
reps which will be discussed in section 4.8.
It is a well-known result in quantum mechanics that the wave function of a set of
identical particles must be either symmetric or anti-symmetric with respect to the
interchange of any pair of these identical particles (see any reputable book on quan-
tum mechanics). The total wave function must be symmetric for bosons such as, for
example, photons, cc-particles, phonons, magnons, etc. and anti-symmetric for fer-
mions such as, for example, electrons, protons, neutrons, etc.; the principle of anti-
symmetry for fermions may be more commonly recognized as the Pauli exclusion
principle. When there are two identical particles this leads to the concept of the
symmetrized and anti-symmetrized Kronecker squares of a representation; the idea
of a Kronecker product of two representations of a group has already been intro-
duced in section 1.3 (see eqn. (1.3.23)).
(2.5.3)
SYMMETRY-ADAPTED FUNCTIONS FOR THE POINT GROUPS 
77
and
