60
SYMMETRY-ADAPTED 
FUNCTIONS FOR THE POINT GROUPS
Notes to Table 2.2
(i) The names of the point groups are given in both the international and Schonflies notations. Sometimes two
or three point groups have identical characters; such groups are tabulated together.
(ii) For each point group the names of the representations appear in the column headed by the name of the point
group. The standard Mulliken notation for the representations is used (Margenau and Murphy 1956, Mulliken 1933).
The T notation of Koster, Dimmock, Wheeler, and Statz (1963) is also included for reference, though we shall not
actually use it in this book.
(iii) For each point group the names of the operators appear in the row begun by the name of that group. They
are to be identified with respect to axes Oxyz by means of Figs. 1.1-1.4 and Tables 1.2-1.6. Note that we have
taken the first setting of the International tables for X-ray crystallography (Henry and Lonsdale 1965) for the point
groups of the monoclinic system; the z-axis (being the polar axis) is more appropriate than the _y-axis in the study
of harmonic functions.
(r\0 We have not given the character tables of those groups that are direct products of some other point group
with T (Cf); the character tables of these direct product groups can be constructed as follows. If a group G' is given
as a direct product of the form G ® T then the reps of G' fall into pairs; each pair Afg and Mu arise out of a single
rep M of G and the characters of Mg and Mu obey the following rules. If R' = RI then for all R e G the character
of R in Ms and Mu is equal to the character of R in M; the character of R' in Ma is equal to the character of
R in M, but the character of R in Mu is minus the character of R in M. In the r notation of Koster, Dimmock,
Wheeler, and Statz (1963), if F = M in G, then F+ = Me and F~ = Mu in G'.
(v) By using Theorem 1.3.9 one can easily show that all the point-group reps are of the first kind, except reps with
complex characters and these are of the third kind.
(vi) The Kronecker products of the various reps of each point group and the compatibilities between the reps of
a point group and those of its subgroups are given in the tables of Koster, Dimmock, Wheeler, and Statz (1963).
TABLE 2.3
Matrices for the degenerate representations of the crystallographic point groups
