8 
SYMMETRY AND THE SOLID STATE
group theory. Some of these methods appear in Chapter 4 and they rest heavily for
their appreciation on the material in this section and the next.
DEFINITION 1.2.1. Group. A group G is a set of elements together with a binary
composition called a product such that
(i) the product of any two elements in the group is defined and is a member of
the group: if A, B e G then AB e G,
(ii) the product is associative: A(BC) = (AB)C for all A, B, C e G,
(iii) there exists a unique identity} E in the group: EA = AE = A for all A e G,
and
(iv) every element has a unique inverse} element: given A e G there exists a unique
element A ~~
1 such that A A ~ : = A ~l A = E.
DEFINITION 1.2.2. Order of a group. The number of elements in a group, G,
is called the order of the group.
In what follows we shall be dealing only with groups of finite order. The symbol
|G| is often used to denote the order of G.
DEFINITION 1.2.3. Order of an element. The order of an element A e G is the least
positive integer s such that As = E.
From Definition 1.2.1 it follows that a group is completely defined by its multipli-
cation table. In fact, it is sufficient to give a set of relations involving certain elements
from which the whole multiplication table can be constructed. The elements Pl,
P2,. • ., Pm of a group G are called a set of generators (or sometimes generating
elements) if every element of G is expressible as a finite product of powers (including
negative powers) of P l 5 P2,. . ., Pm. The set of relations gk(P\, P2, • • ., Pm) =
E (k = 1, 2, . . ., s) satisfied by the generators, which are sufficient to determine the
whole multiplication table of G are called the defining relations (or sometimes
generating relations) of G. For a lengthy discussion of generators and generating
relations see, for example, the book by Coxeter and Moser (1965).
Example 1.2.1. In Table 1.1 we give the multiplication table for the group Gl of
order 6 whose generators are P and Q and whose defining relations are P3 = E,
Q2 = E, and QP = P2Q. P is of order 3 and Q is of order 2.
Sets of generators and defining relations are not by any means unique; in fact it is
often more straightforward to take more generators than are strictly necessary.
There is always, of course, a minimum number of generators without which one
J It is not necessary to postulate the uniqueness and two-sidedness of the identity and of the inverse
elements; for the existence of a right identity (AE = A) and right inverses (AA^1 = E) together with
axioms (i) and (ii) is sufficient to establish uniqueness and two-sidedness. However these properties are
so fundamental that many authors include them in their definition.
