40 
SYMMETRY AND THE SOLID STATE
corners of squares, is imagined to continue off the diagram to infinity, then these
points constitute the simple square 2-dimensional Bravais lattice, p. There are five
different 2-dimensional Bravais lattices (Alexander 1929, Alexander and Herrmann
1929, Belov 19596) and they are described and illustrated in Volume 1 of the Inter-
national tables for X-ray crystallography (Henry and Lonsdale 1965). In a 3-dimen-
sional Euclidean space, £(3), there are 14 essentially different lattices possible and
these are called the (3-dimensional) Bravais lattices (Bravais 1849a, b, 1850). It should
perhaps be emphasized that there is not necessarily a Bravais lattice point at the
centre of every atom in a real crystal, nor is it necessary for Bravais lattice points to
be occupied by atoms.
If we choose one particular lattice point to be the origin, O, then we may write t,
the position vector of any other lattice point, as
t = Mi + "2*2 + «3t3 
(1-5.1)
where nl, n2, and «3 are integers and tl512, and t3 are the fundamental translations
that join O to three of its (non-coplanar) nearest neighbours. The translation opera-
tions t defined by eqn. (1.5.1) form an infinite group which is called the translation
group of the Bravais lattice. In addition to the symmetry of the group of translations,
the Bravais lattice is also invariant under certain point-group operations acting at
the lattice points and, sometimes at least, at other points too. The point-group
operations at any lattice point form a point group P, which is in fact the holosym-
metric point group of one of the crystal systems or syngonies, i.e. P is the point group
with the largest number of symmetry operations in the crystal system in question.
In the example of the 2-dimensional Bravais lattice illustrated in Fig. 1.6 the lattice
has the symmetry of the point group 4mm (C4l!), or 4/mmm (D4h) if the dots are on
both the back and front of the page. The holosymmetric point groups, P, of the seven
crystal systems, the triclinic, monoclinic, orthorhombic, tetragonal, trigonal, hexa-
gonal, and cubic are T (Q), 2/m (C2h), mmm (D2h), 4/mmm (D4h), 3m (D3d), 6/mmm
(D6h), and m3m (Oh) respectively. The fact that the point group P is the holosym-
metric point group of the relevant crystal system arises from the following facts;
(i) P must contain the space-inversion operation because if t is a vector of the Bravais
lattice then so also is — t, and (ii) together with axes of orders 3, 4, and 6, P also con-
tains reflection planes that pass through these axes. It is therefore possible to assign
each of the 14 Bravais lattices to one of the seven crystal systems and these Bravais
lattices are illustrated in Fig. 1.7. Basically it is because the point-group symmetry
of a crystalline solid must be compatible with the symmetry of the Bravais lattice of
that solid that there are only 32 possible crystallographic point groups. Each of the
32 crystallographic point groups is either the point group of one of the Bravais
lattices, i.e., the holosymmetric point group of one of the seven crystal systems, or
else it is a subgroup of one of these seven point groups.
We have said that a Bravais lattice in three dimensions is an infinite array of points
