SYMMETRY AND THE SOLID STATE 
7
1959, Mclntosh 1963, von der Lage and Bethe 1947) or plane waves (Cornwell 1969,
Luehrmann 1968, Schlosser 1962, Slater 19656, 1967). By restricting the expansion of
an unknown if/t for an energy level Et to those functions that are known to belong to
the representation of £; considerable simplifications can very often be achieved in the
actual process of solving Schrodinger's equation to determine \l/t. The knowledge of
the transformation properties of the wave functions \jji is also of importance when
considering a transition of a system between two energy levels Et and Ej. It is then
possible to use the condition that the quantum-mechanical matrix element of the
transition is a pure number in order to determine, for any given perturbing potential,
whether a given transition is allowed or forbidden, that is, to determine selection rules.
The group-theoretical determination of selection rules for transitions in isolated mole-
cules and in ions or molecules in crystals involves the study of products of various
point-group representations and this is discussed in the references we have already
mentioned. To use the knowledge of the transformation properties of i//, to study
selection rules for transitions involving non-localized states in crystals is more compli-
cated and initial work has been done by several authors (Birman 19626, 1963, Elliott
and Loudon 1960, Lax and Hopfield 1961, Zak 1962).
1.2. Group theory
We begin the mathematical work of this book by giving a short account of the theory
of groups and their representations. We do not give proofs of theorems as these
appear in the first few chapters of many well-known books such as those by Hamer-
mesh (1962), Lomont (1959), Lyubarskii (1960), and Wigner (1959). For the sake of
clarity, however, we illustrate some of the definitions and theorems by means of an
example; for this purpose we use a group containing six elements which, as an ab-
stract group we call G^ (see Table 5.1) and which, in one of its realizations, is the
symmetry group of an equilateral triangle.
There are two good reasons for starting with a preliminary account such as this.
The first is that it makes clear what the background to the work is, and hence what
it is recommended that the reader should be familiar with before proceeding with
the rest of the book. The second reason is that it serves to introduce a large amount
of notation; furthermore, when this is done on topics that are relatively familiar,
then a reader can adjust himself more easily to the style and notation of the authors
than if he is plunged immediately into new work.
The following set of definitions and theorems forms, therefore, the group-theoreti-
cal background to the work of this book. In later chapters some of them will be used
as building blocks for further theorems that are either more advanced or more
directly related to the study of solids. The groups that occur in the theory of solids
have quite a complicated structure and, if the theorems needed for dealing with them
are established rigorously and in complete detail, the proofs of such theorems require
some advanced algebraic methods not commonly met in introductory courses on
