4 
SYMMETRY AND THE SOLID STATE
magnetic groups, or Shubnikov groups. The idea of black and white groups was
actually introduced long before Shubnikov's work, by Heesch (1929a, b, 1930a, b)
and also discussed by Woods (1935a-c), but at that time there seemed to be no very
great use for these groups in the description of physical systems. It was only with the
introduction of the use of neutron diffraction techniques that it became apparent
that these groups could be used in the description of magnetically ordered structures.
If we think of s as being the two allowed values of a magnet's direction, parallel and
anti-parallel to a particular direction, then 0fr is the operation that reverses a magnetic
moment. <% can then be thought of as being the operation of time-inversion.
The theory of finite groups dates from the time of Cauchyi who was responsible
for noticing that a number of apparently disconnected facts could be explained
simultaneously by introducing the concept of a group. Galois§ added to the theory
a number of new concepts, including that of an invariant subgroup, and part of his
work on the theory of equations was a first and most startling example of the power
of group theory in its applications. However, it is to Serret (1866) that we owe the
first connected account of group theory. Since then there has been an increasing flow
of literature on the subject and today abstract group theory still flourishes as a major
topic for research. Furthermore, the variety of applications of finite groups in a host
of mathematical situations as diverse as the theory of permutations, the study of
symmetry, and the theories of algebraic and differential equations, to mention just
a few, means that a study of groups is essential for those engaged in many disciplines
requiring mathematical techniques. The natural sciences are riddled with examples
of problems requiring a knowledge of group theory and it is a safe assumption that
the biological sciences and perhaps even the social sciences, as they become in-
creasingly mathematical, will produce further interesting applications.
In a mathematical theory it is often possible to pick out a number of famous
scholars who have been responsible for the major advances. Group theory is no ex-
ception. The only fear we have in mentioning certain names is that those of many
others who have made great advances are likely to be omitted. However, it is surely
no injustice to single out the names of Sylow, Frobenius, Burnside, Schur, Miller,
and Mackey (apologizing immediately to Noether, Brauer, Ito, and many others
who have made great contributions to the theory of abstract groups but whose work
is not so directly related to the applications in this book).
Sylow (1872) made considerable progress in describing the structure of a finite
group particularly in relation to its number of elements when this number is factor-
ized as a product of primes. Frobenius (1896a, b, 1898) originated and was largely
responsible for the theory of group representations and group characters, though
Burnside (1903, 1911) made such significant simplifications and was responsible for
so many original results that he also must be thought of as a group theoretician of
great influence.
±1789-1857. 
§1811-32.
