SYMMETRY AND THE SOLID STATE 
25
and leave the axes fixed are said to be active. Operators that move the axes and leave
the points fixed are said to be passive. In this book we shall always use the active
convention. The equation linking the two conventions is simply
R 
= R - 1 
H 4 V\
vactive 
^passive' 
^l.l-.^y
However, great care must be exercised in transferring from one convention to the
other because the correspondence between the two conventions is not an automor-
phism but rather an anti-automorphism; that is to say, if R, S, and T are the matrices
of three rotations such that in the active mode
R 
«s 
= T 
M 4 4"i
Avactive '-'active 
* active 
v*-^* V
then the corresponding equation for passive operators is
^passive ^passive 
^passive' 
^l.^r.Jj
the order of multiplication of the operators on the left being reversed, rather than
preserved as would have been the case for an automorphism.
Every subgroup of the 3-dimensional rotation group is a point group. Subgroups
of the proper rotation group are called proper point groups. A proper point group
contains only rotations about axes through O. In what follows we are concerned
only with point groups of finite order.
We now classify the proper point groups of finite order. These are:
(i) The cyclic groups
The cyclic groups occur when there is only one axis of rotation, say Oz. Such groups
are denoted by n in the international notation and by Cn in the Schonflies notation.
For each positive integer n there is a well-defined cyclic group whose n elements are
rotations about the given axis through angles 2nq/n, where q — 0, 1, 2, . . .,(n — 1).
In the Schonflies notation the anti-clockwise rotation through an angle 2n/n about
the axis Oz is denoted by C*z; the corresponding clockwise rotation is denoted by
C~z. The superscript + is omitted when n = 2.
(ii) The dihedral groups
Dihedral groups consist of all rotations that transform a regular «-sided prism into
itself. Such groups are denoted in the international notation by nil, n even, and by
n2, n odd, and by Dtt in the Schonflies notation. For each positive integer n ^ 2 there
is a well-defined dihedral group whose 2n elements are: n rotations about the axis
of the prism parallel to its edges through angles 2nq/n, where 9 = 0, 1, 2, . . ., (n — 1),
the axis of these rotations being called the principal axis; and n further rotations each
of order 2 (that is, through an angle n)—each such rotation being about an axis called
a secondary axis, which is perpendicular to the principal axis. There are n secondary
axes and they are symmetrically placed within the prism so that the angle between
any two adjacent secondary axes is n/n. When n is even half the secondary axes pass
