1
Symmetry and the solid state
1.1. Introduction
THE history of man's interest in symmetry goes back many centuries (Belov 19566,
Coxeter and Moser 1965, Steno 1669), but its study on a modern scientific basis can
be considered to have been started by the Abbe Haiiy. Haiiy studied the behaviour
of a specimen of calcite when it was cleaved and, by breaking it into smaller and
smaller pieces and studying the angles between the faces of the fragments, he con-
vinced himself that the crystal was made up by the repetition of a large number of
identical units. Haiiy (1815a-J) studied many other crystals as well and summarized
his conclusions in his so-called Loi de symmetric. The study of symmetry developed
through the nineteenth century with the formulation of ideas about point groups,
Bravais lattices, and space groups.
A point group is a set of symmetry operations acting at a point and obeying the
requirements that they should form a group in the mathematical sense; the crystal-
lographic point groups satisfy the extra requirement that they must be compatible
with a space lattice. Only a finite number of different combinations of symmetry
operations are observed to occur in real crystals. The derivation of these 32 point
groups was published by Hessel (1830) but his work was neglected for over 30 years
until they were derived again by Gadolin (1869). Since then the point groups have
been studied extensively, both in their original crystallographic context and, more
recently, in the context of group-theoretical studies of the physics and chemistry of
molecules and solids. There are useful crystallographic texts, for example, by
Buerger (1956) and Phillips (1963a). General discussions of the theory associated with
the applications of the group-theoretical studies of the point groups are given by
many authors (for example; Bhagavantam and Venkatarayudu 1962, Cracknell 19686,
Hamermesh 1962, Heine 1960, Tinkham 1964).
We can also consider another collection of groups, this time by considering trans-
lational symmetry operations. If we were to look at the internal structure of a crystal
we would find that it is made up of a large number of atoms or molecules regularly
arranged; it would be possible to find a set of points within the crystal which are
similar. That is, the crystal looks exactly the same if viewed from any one of these
points as it does if it is viewed from any other of them. If we consider such a set of
identical points they make up what the mathematicians call a lattice. It is possible
to show that there is only a small number of essentially different ways of arranging
a set of identical points so that the environment of each one is the same. This was
done by Bravais (1850) who showed that in a three-dimensional space there are only
