28 
SYMMETRY AND THE SOLID STATE
Also, if the letter m is separated from a number by a solidus (/), then one plane of
symmetry is perpendicular to the principal rotation axis. Finally, in the Schonflies
notation for the point groups the subscripts h, v, and d stand for reflection planes
that are respectively horizontal, vertical, and diagonal which is, of course, meaning-
less except when the point group concerned is in some standard orientation. In many
cases we have to use settings of the point groups that are non-standard and this is
why we prefer the international notation for the label of the point group itself. How-
ever no confusion can arise because in such non-standard settings all the elements
will be given a definite label that the reader can identify by referring to Table 1.3.
We began this section by saying that a point group is a group of symmetry opera-
tions which act at a point O and also leave invariant all distances and angles in a
3-dimensional Euclidean space, £(3). In this book we are concerned with the theory
of the representations of the groups of symmetry operations of crystalline solids.
We therefore shall be restricting our discussion to the crystallographic point groups.
A crystallographic point group must satisfy the extra requirement that it be compat-
ible with the translational symmetry of some crystalline solid. The possible point-
group operations that may satisfy the extra requirement are the identity, the inversion,
reflections in certain planes, and rotations about certain axes of orders 1, 2, 3, 4, or 6.
It is possible to show that only a finite number of essentially different groups can be
constructed from these operations. In fact there are 32 different crystallographic
point groups and many books give discussions of various of their properties (for
example, Buerger (1956), Koster, Dimmock, Wheeler, and Statz (1963), Phillips
(1963a)). The 32 point groups can be classified into seven crystal systems (sometimes
called syngonies) according to the order of the principal axis. There are five crystal
systems for point groups with a single principal axis of order 1, 2, 3, 4, or 6, namely
the triclinic, monoclinic, trigonal, tetragonal, and hexagonal crystal systems respec-
tively. Two more systems also exist, to complete the seven, the orthorhombic system
which has three mutually perpendicular rotation axes of order 2, and the cubic system
which has four rotation axes directed towards the vertices of a regular tetrahedron,
each of order 3. Most of the point groups that have been described in this chapter
are crystallographic point groups. Examples of non-crystallographic point groups
that we have described are the icosahedral group and the cyclic and dihedral groups
of order n, where n takes any value except 1, 2, 3, 4, or 6.
Notation of point-group operations
There are, in fact, very many different notations to be found in the literature for the
labelling of the symmetry elements of the point groups; none of them is entirely
satisfactory (for a discussion of various notations see Warren (1968)). Some authors
(for example, Kovalev (1965), Miller and Love (1967), Slater (19656)), apparently
disconcerted by this lack of uniformity, have taken, for example, to labelling the
elements of the cubic group m3m (Oh) by Rl, R2,. . ., R^8 and of the hexagonal
