46 
SYMMETRY AND THE SOLID STATE
as can easily be verified by applying {R2 I V2J to both sides of eqn. (1.5.2). From
eqn. (1.5.3) it follows immediately that the inverse of [R^ \ Vj} is {R^1 \ — -Rf1^}.
The Seitz operators for all the 230 space groups are identified by various authors
(Faddeyev 1964, Henry and Lonsdale 1965, Koptsik 1966, Kovalev 1965, Lyubarskii
1960, Miller and Love 1967) and they are listed in Chapter 3.
Notation for the labels of the space groups
A space group is classified first by the crystal system to which it belongs. Any second-
ary classification depends upon how much information one wants to convey. It is
possible to label the point group to which the space group is isogonal, that is, the point
group which is obtained by taking all the point-group operators present from amongst
the operations of the space-group. J This is the position that is adopted when using
the Schonflies notation (Hilton 1903). In this notation the space group is given the
Schonflies label of its isogonal point group and different space groups having the
same isogonal point group are given an arbitrary distinguishing superscript. This
represented merely the order in which Schonflies (1891) presented the derivation of
the space groups. There are, for example, 10 space groups isogonal to the cubic point
group Oh (m3m) and these are distributed among the three cubic Bravais lattices,
four primitive, four face-centred and two body-centred, and they are numbered
0,1, O%,. . ., Ol°. This notation has two disadvantages. First, it is not possible to
tell at a glance on which Bravais lattice the space group is based; for example, O% is
face-centred and Ol is body-centred. Secondly, there is no indication of whether the
space group is symmorphic or non-symmorphic. An even more arbitrary scheme in
which each space group is given a number between 1 and 230 was developed by
Astbury and Yardley (1924) and has been included in the International tables for
X-ray crystallography (Henry and Lonsdale 1965).
The two disadvantages of the Schonflies notation are overcome by using the inter-
national notation, which not only determines the two features just mentioned but
also gives some idea of the nature and orientation of the symmetry elements present
in the space group (Hermann 1928a, Mauguin 1931, Schiebold 1929). Starting with
the international point-group symbol, for example m3m, this is prefixed by the letter
describing the Bravais lattice, for example P, F, I, for primitive, face-centred, and
body-centred respectively, so that we obtain the symbols Pm3m, Fm3m, and Im3m.
These symbols denote the three symmorphic space groups isogonal to the point group
mini (Oh). When a point group can be situated on a Bravais lattice in more than one
orientation, as for instance 42m (D2d) in the tetragonal system, this is allowed for by
attaching significance to the ordering of the characters in the international space-
group symbol; thus P42m (D2d) and P4m2 (D2d) are distinct space groups. For non-
symmorphic space groups the symbol is modified as follows. For any reflection plane
t Some writers use the word isomorphous where we use the word isogonal.
