30
SYMMETRY AND THE SOLID STATE
operator can be separately identified. The notation for the proper rotations has
already been indicated in the classification of the proper point groups; the identi-
fication is made complete by reference to Tables 1.2 and 1.3 and to Figs. 1.1-1.3.
FIG. 1.2. Symmetry elements: trigonal and hexagonal systems. The z-axis is vertically upwards, out of the page.
The labels of the symmetry operations are placed on the figure in the position to which the letter E is taken by that
operation.
Many results depend for their usefulness on a complete identification of the symmetry
elements present and so we shall give some attention to this matter. To identify the
symmetry elements for point groups belonging to most crystal systems it is possible
to use a plane figure such as a stereogram, and we do this for the triclinic, monoclinic,
orthorhombic, and tetragonal systems in Fig. 1.1 and for the trigonal and hexagonal
systems in Fig. 1.2. Two-sided paper models have been used by Schiff(1954) to help
visualize the different non-cubic point groups. However, for the cubic system it is
easier to identify the symmetry elements from the figure of a cube; this is done in
Fig. 1.3. C^r is an anti-clockwise rotation of the points of space through 2n/n radians
about the axis labelled by r on the figure in question. Cm is a clockwise rotation of
the points of space through 2n/n radians about the same axis. E is the identity and /
is the inversion. In Table 1.2 the operators that appear in a given system are listed for
each of the seven crystal systems; in each part of the table there are two columns,
the elements in the right-hand column being the product of/with the corresponding
elements in the left-hand column. The elements given in this table are those that appear
when the appropriate point group is in the standard setting with respect to the x, y,
and z axes of the figure. Non-standard settings of certain point groups will sometimes
have to be used, but since each element is given a definite label this will be no cause
