SYMMETRY AND THE SOLID STATE 
47
that has been replaced by a glide plane the appropriate part of the symbol is replaced
by another letter denoting a glide plane; thus Fd?>m (Ol), the space group of the dia-
mond structure, is face-centred and non-symmorphic, with glide planes in a diagonal
direction. Other letters used include the crystal axis directions a, b, and c. For a
screw axis the part of the space-group symbol denoting the order of such an axis,
for example 4 of P432, is replaced by the same symbol with an added suffix denoting
the size of the translation of the screw axis. Thus P4132 (O7), one of the cubic space
groups isogonal to the point group 432 (0), is primitive with the fourfold rotation
axis replaced by a fourfold screw axis so that a translation of one-quarter of a lattice
vector in that direction is associated with each of the fourfold rotations. The inter-
national notation is not perfect, but is well known, carefully identified (Henry and
Lonsdale 1965), and widely accepted. The original form of this notation is explained
in the old International tables for X-ray crystallography (Bragg, von Laue, and
Hermann 1935a, b) and the later modifications are explained in the new tables
(Henry and Lonsdale 1965); the use of these tables in the identification of space
groups will be discussed further in Chapter 3 (see section 3.5). In this book we always
refer to a point group or space group by its international symbol followed by its
Schonflies symbol in brackets.
Function space operators
If R is the rotational part of a Seitz space-group operator, that is, R is a point-group
operation, then each operator R acts on the points of space r by means of an equation
likeeqn. (1.4.8),
Rr = r . 
(1.5.4)
If a scalar function/(r) is defined then the movement of the points r will induce a
corresponding change in the function. This new function will be such that the new
function at the transformed point is equal in value to the old function at the original
point. That is to say,
<7(r')=/(0. 
(1.5.5)
It is customary to write g = Rf, so that to each operator R there is defined a corre-
sponding function space operator R. From eqns. (1.5.4) and (1.5.5) it follows that
Rf(T)=f(R-ir). (1
It is perhaps unfortunate, but nevertheless a fact, that most writers do not use a
separate symbol for R and indeed there is no need for a separate symbol provided
one distinguishes carefully whether the operator is acting on a function or on a vector.
Care must be taken to manipulate function space operators by means of eqn. (1.5.6).
The following examples should act as sufficient warning.
(1.5.6)
