SYMMETRY AND THE SOLID STATE 
43
such that each point has the same environment in the same orientation. A unit cell
may be defined in various ways and it will be specified by three non-coplanar vectors
which form the edges of a parallelepiped. The symbols a, b, and c are used to denote
these three vectors. It is usually convenient to select the unit-cell vectors in such a
way that the unit cell clearly exhibits the symmetry of the lattice. This conventional
choice of unit cell may then not be primitive, that is, it may contain the equivalent
of more than one lattice point. The parallelepiped constructed on the three basic
vectors t l 5 t2, and t3 of the Bravais lattice (eqn. (1.5.1)) is called the primitive unit
cell. In each Bravais lattice where the conventional unit cell and the primitive unit
cell are not identical it is possible to establish the relationship between them. This is
done for instance in Table 2.2.2 of Volume 1 of the International tables for X-ray
crystallography. The unit cells illustrated in Fig. 1.7 are the conventional unit cells.
The actual specification of t1, t2, and t3 for each of the 14 Bravais lattices will be given
in Chapter 3 (Table 3.1). We can illustrate the distinction between conventional and
primitive unit cells with a 2-dimensional example. The 2-dimensional primitive
rectangular Bravais lattice, p, has its lattice points arranged on the corners of a set
of rectangles and the conventional unit cell is one such rectangle, see Fig. 1.8(a);
this is also a fundamental unit cell of this lattice. If a point is added to the centre of
each of these cells a new Bravais lattice is obtained, the centred rectangular Bravais
lattice, c, see Fig. 1.8(6). A conventional unit cell, which exhibits the rectangular
symmetry, is shown with broken lines and a primitive unit cell is shown with con-
tinuous lines. The conventional unit cell contains effectively two lattice points while
the primitive unit cell contains only one lattice point. Another unit cell that is some-
times used is the Wigner-Seitz unit cell (Wigner and Seitz 1933). The Wigner-Seitz
unit cell of a Bravais lattice is obtained by choosing as origin, O, any one of the
lattice points and drawing the planes that bisect perpendicularly the lines joining O
to its nearest (and sometimes to its next-nearest) neighbours. The unit cell bounded
by these planes is called the Wigner-Seitz unit cell; these unit cells are illustrated,
for example, by Delaunay (1932).
A Bravais lattice, as we have described it, is an array of mathematical points that
have position but no magnitude or shape. We now wish to include in our discussion
the atoms or molecules of which the crystal is constituted. We are then effectively
associating a similar collection of atoms with each Bravais lattice point and this set
of atoms or molecules must itself possess symmetry that is compatible with the point-
group symmetry of the Bravais lattice of the crystal. One type of symmetry operation
of the crystal will be a compound operation consisting of some point-group opera-
tion followed by a translation t (see eqn. (1.5.1)) of the Bravais lattice. Thus, an
especially simple type of space group arises by associating with each point of a
Bravais lattice one of the point groups belonging to the same crystal system. In this
way it is possible to obtain £/= 1 nipi space groups where n{ is the number of point
groups in a certain crystal system and p{ is the number of Bravais lattices in that
