24 
SYMMETRY AND THE SOLID STATE
Example 1.3.11. Using the notation of Example 1.3.9, repeated use of eqn.
(1.3.24) leads to the following values of the Clebsch-Gordan coefficients for G|:
cn,i = i;
 Ci2,2 = i;
 Ci3,3 = i;
 
C22,i = i; £23,3 = i;
 C33,i — i; £33,2 = i;
C33,3 = 1; and all others not derived from these by eqn. (1.3.26) are zero.
1.4. Point groups
A 3-dimensional point group is a group of symmetry operators which act at a point
O (and therefore keep O fixed) and which also leave invariant all distances and angles
in a 3-dimensional Euclidean space, E(3). The symmetry operators having these
properties are the unitary operators acting at O, namely rotations about axes through
O or products of such rotations and the inversion. Such products include reflections
in planes through O.
If the group contains all possible rotations and no other elements it is called the
3-dimensional proper rotation group and it is isomorphic with the group SO(3) of all
(3 x 3) orthogonal matrices having determinant + 1. The reason for this is that under
a rotation R a point P with position vector r will be moved to a point P' with position
vector r' governed by an equation of the form
r' = Rr, 
(1.4.1)
where R is a (3 x 3) matrix. Since all distances and angles are to be left invariant it
follows that the equation
r.s = Rr.Rs = r'.s'. 
(1.4.2)
must be true for all possible pairs of vectors r, s. This holds if and only if R is an
orthogonal matrix. As is well known the determinant of any orthogonal matrix is
either +1 or — 1. In fact only those orthogonal matrices with determinant +1
correspond to rotations; this is because the rotation through zero angle is the identity
and its determinant is +1 and from requirements of continuity it follows that the
determinant of a matrix corresponding to any rotation is also + 1.
If the group contains all possible rotations and their products with the inversion
it is called the 3-dimensional rotation group and it is isomorphic with the group 0(3)
of all (3 x 3) orthogonal matrices. Operators that correspond to matrices with
determinant — 1 are called improper rotations and are products of a proper rotation
and the inversion. The inversion commutes with all rotations; this follows at once
from the fact that it is represented in 0(3) by minus the unit matrix.
It is important at this stage to make clear the convention we use when dealing with
unitary operators. From what has so far been written the convention may already
be clear, but, in case this is not so, it is worth emphasizing that we interpret unitary
operators as acting on the points of space and that the coordinates of these points
are always referred to a fixed set of axes. Operators that move the points of a space
