44 
SYMMETRY AND THE SOLID STATE
system, the suffix z ranging over the seven crystal systems. For example, there are
three cubic Bravais lattices and five cubic point groups, so that there are 15 cubic
space groups that can be derived in this way. A space group of this form is said to
be symmorphic and it is a semi-direct product group of the translation group of the
Bravais lattice and a point group. The theory of semi-direct product groups will be
discussed in Chapter 4. The above formula does not at once account for all the sym-
morphic space groups; there are two reasons for this. First, it is possible to associate
a trigonal point group with the hexagonal Bravais lattice; so for the trigonal system
we must take/),. = 2 even though there is only one trigonal Bravais lattice. Secondly,
it does in fact happen that there can sometimes be two different and distinguishable
orientations of a point group possible on a Bravais lattice; this leads to a few extra
symmorphic space groups that occur irregularly as shown in column 6 of Table 1.7.
There are in fact 73 different symmorphic space groups.
In a symmorphic space group the point-group operations and the operations of
the translation group are essentially separable and the point-group operations that
are present are, on their own, symmetry operations of the crystal. A second type of
space group can arise by starting with a symmorphic space group and replacing some
of the reflection planes by glide reflection planes and some of the rotation axes by
screw rotation axes; these are commonly called glide planes and screw axes respec-
tively. A glide reflection symmetry operation is a compound operation that consists
of a reflection in a plane, ra, together with a translation v, which is often, but not
necessarily, in the plane m itself. The final result of two successive performances of
such a glide reflection operation is to produce a translation that must itself be a
member of the group of translations of the Bravais lattice of the crystal. In a similar
way we may have a screw axis of order n; a screw rotation symmetry operation
consists of a rotation through 2n/n about an axis, followed by a translation, v, which
is often, but not necessarily, along the axis of rotation. If this screw rotation operation
is performed n times in succession, the result is a pure translation that must again
be a member of the group of translations of the Bravais lattice of the crystal. By
including glide reflection planes and screw rotation axes it is possible to derive a
further 157 space groups that are called non-symmorphic space groups or asymmorphic
space groups. One can impose the condition that the translational part of each glide
reflection operation must be in the reflection plane itself and that the translational
part of each screw rotation operation should be along the axis of the rotation. If
this condition is imposed then, when there are glide reflection planes or screw rotation
axes present, the symmetry elements may not act all at one point in the crystal. When
this is so the operators can always be transformed to act at one point but then the
translations may lose their sense of being along the axis of the screw rotation or of
being in the plane of the glide reflection and may be in some strange direction. The
former viewpoint is visually more satisfying, but the latter viewpoint is essential for
a systematic mathematical treatment, and we shall therefore adopt the convention
