SYMMETRY AND THE SOLID STATE 
5
As a worker with a prodiguous output (of approximately 800 papers between
1894 and 1946) Miller (1894,1946) devoted considerable attention to the investigation
of the structures and properties of various groups of finite order. He was responsible
for determining the numbers of finite groups of various specific orders and studying
the interrelationships between the structures of these groups, as exemplified by their
generating relations.
The study of relations between representations of a group and those of an invariant
subgroup leads inevitably to projective representations. Schur was the first to notice
this and in an astounding sequence of definitive papers (1904, 1907, 1911) he not only
laid the foundations of the general theory of projective representations but established
most of the results that are regarded as being of particular significance. Again it was
Frobenius (1898) who was responsible for the first construction of what is now called
an induced representation. However, this particular notion, so important to applica-
tions in physics, was not developed significantly until after 1950 when Mackey in a
series of papers (1951, 1952, 1953a, b, 1958) made extremely important advances
that already find considerable application not only in the theory of space groups but
throughout the whole realm of theoretical physics (see also Mackey (1968)).
We have described the importance of point groups, Bravais lattices, and space
groups in specifying both the macroscopic symmetry of a crystal, as determined by
goniometry, and the symmetry of the internal structure of a crystal, as determined
by X-ray diffraction or neutron diffraction experiments. In classical physics there
are some applications of group theory, such as, for instance, the investigation of the
normal modes of vibration of a molecule or solid (Wigner 1930) or the determination,
for a crystal belonging to a given point group, of relationships that may exist between
the various components of a tensor describing some macroscopic property (see, for
example, Nye (1957)). However, it was with the advent of quantum mechanics that
all the powerful mathematics of group theory and representation theory really be-
came most useful in helping to understand physical systems. Much of the pioneer
work on the application of group theory in quantum mechanics was done by Weyl,
Wigner, and von Neumann (see Weyl (1931), the translation of the classic book by
Wigner (1959) and the collected works of von Neumann (1961, 1963)). In studying
a crystal at the microscopic level one has to remember that each of the individual
particles of which the crystal is composed obeys quantum mechanics rather than
classical mechanics and therefore has to be described by an appropriate wave function
il/. The key to the application of group theory to quantum mechanics lies in the result
that is expounded in Chapter 11 of Wigner's classic book (English translation, Wigner
(1959)). If a quantum-mechanical system is described by the appropriate Schrodinger
wave equation Wigner's theorem can be summarized as follows: 'the representation
of the group of the Schrodinger equation which belongs to a particular eigenvalue is
uniquely determined up to a similarity transformation.' Apart from accidental de-
generacies this representation will be irreducible. The irreducible representations are
