SYMMETRY AND THE SOLID STATE 
19
DEFINITION 1.3.6. Irreducible representation. If V has no proper invariant sub-
space under T (that is, no subspace invariant under T except V itself and the zero-
vector) then y is said to be an irreducible representation. If there exists a proper
invariant subspace under T then y is said to be reducible. If V can be split up into
the direct sum of subspaces each of which is invariant under T and each of which is
the carrier space for an irreducible representation of G then y is said to be completely
reducible.
THEOREM 1.3.5. All representations of a finite group G are completely reducible.
THEOREM 1.3.6. Schur's lemma. Let F(G) and F'(G) be two irreducible repre-
sentations ofG such that F(G)S = SF'(G)/or all G e G, then either S = 0 or S is a
non-singular matrix and F(G) is equivalent to F'(G).
The following criteria for irreducibility are useful.
THEOREM 1.3.7. A representation is irreducible if, and only if, the only matrices
which commute with all matrices of the representation are scalar multiples of the unit
matrix.
THEOREM 1.3.8. Let G be a group of order \G\ with elements G{, G2,. . ., G\c\.
Then F(G) is an irreducible representation if and only if
(1.3.11)
where %/G;) is the character 0/T(G;).
Example 1.3.5. The representations A, B, and FZ(G) of Gg, as defined in Examples
1.3.2-1.3.4 are irreducible.
It should now be clear from the theorems and remarks made in this section that
the task of finding all the representations of a finite group G can be limited to the task
of finding all the non-equivalent unitary irreducible representations of G. From now
on we shall abbreviate the phrase 'unitary irreducible representation" by the word 'rep\
In discussing the problem of the determination of the reps of a finite group, G, we
shall use the following symbols:
G 
a group,
|G| 
the order of G,
Gj 
j = 1 to |G|, the elements of G,
r 
the number of classes of G,
Ct 
t = 1 to r, the classes of G,
rt 
the number of elements in C,,
ri 
the label for the z'th rep of G,
dt or dim Fl 
the dimension of F!
V 
the underlying vector space (or carrier space) of F1
