2 
SYMMETRY AND THE SOLID STATE
14 different lattices possible; consequently these are now known as Bravais lattices,
even though Frankenheim had deduced, incorrectly, 15 such lattices somewhat
earlier.
A point group is concerned with the symmetry of a finite object and for natural
crystals there are only 32 different point groups; a Bravais lattice is concerned with
the arrangement in space of a collection of mathematical points. To study fully the
internal structure of a crystal, that is, the exact detailed arrangement of the atoms
within the unit cell of a crystal, one needs a further development of symmetry studies
known as a space group. A space group takes into consideration the symmetry of an
arrangement of a set of identical objects, each of which is now not a point but is a
finite object or a collection of atoms having some symmetry of its own. The actual
operations present in a space group may be operations of the type which are present
in point groups, namely pure rotations, reflections, the inversion operation, and
roto-inversion or roto-reflection operations. But other operations are possible as well
in a space group: they are screw rotation—and glide reflection operations—of
symmetry. These are symmetry operations in which either a rotation axis or an
ordinary reflection plane has a bodily movement of the crystal combined with it.
In the descriptions of the derivation of the 230 space groups it is usually indicated
that we owe them to Fedorov and Schonflies and sometimes the name of Barlow is
added. A review of the history of the derivation of the space groups, together with
a list of the publications of Barlow, Fedorov, and Schonflies, is given in an article by
Burckhardt (1967). The derivation of the space groups has its origins in the works of
Jordan (1868, 1869) and of Sohncke (1879). Sohncke had derived those space groups,
of which there are 65, that contain only proper rotations and he noted that Jordan
had previously derived them mathematically but had not translated his results into
the more graphic terms of geometry. Schonflies re-derived these 65 space groups and
extended the theory to include the space groups containing reflection planes of
symmetry (Schonflies, 1887a, b, 1889, 1891). Similar results were derived by Fedorov
(1885, 1891a) but his work was written in Russian and has not become so well known
in western Europe; an account of the life and work of E. S. Fedorov and a list of his
publications is given (in Russian) in the book by Shafranovskii (1963). It is evident
that these two scientists began their works independently, one (Fedorov) as the
director of a mine in the Urals and the other (Schonflies) at the suggestion of F. Klein
at Gottingen, but in the course of time they heard of each other's work and compared
their results. Barlow (1883) was first concerned with spherical packings and then
starting with Sohncke's 65 groups he, too, obtained the remaining space groups by
including reflection operations of symmetry (Barlow 1894). Burckhardt (1967) con-
cludes that although Schonflies was not actually the first to establish the existence
of the 230 space groups his writings have been the means of making their enumeration
and identification generally known to the scientific world. His work, which is but
little later than that of Fedorov and is quite independent, culminates in the book
