12 
SYMMETRY AND THE SOLID STATE
DEFINITION 1.2.9. Coset. If H is a subgroup of G and A is any element of G
then the subset HA is called a right coset of H; similarly AH is called a left coset.
A is called the coset representative (and is not in any way special because if B e HA
then the coset HB = HA, so that any element of a coset can serve as the coset repre-
sentative).
THEOREM 1.2.3. A group G with a subgroup H splits up into 'left cosets' of H. The
following properties hold:
(i) every element ofG is in some left coset and no element ofG is in more than one
left coset,
(ii) every left coset contains the same number of elements, this number being equal
to the order ofH. Thus the order ofH is a divisor of the order ofG; the quotient
|G|/|H|, which is just the number, t, of left cosets o f H , is called the 'index' of
H in G
Example 1.2.13. Take G = G^ and H = G\, consisting of E, P, and P2. If we
write G§ = (EG\ + QG^) then this is a decomposition of G| satisfying the condi-
tions of Theorem 1.2.3 with t = 2.
Example 1.2.14. From Example 1.2.9 the orders of the subgroups of G^ are seen
to be 1, 2, 3, and 6, and these numbers are all divisors of 6, the order of G§. This
division property is called Lagrange's theorem.
DEFINITION 1.2.10. Invariant subgroup. If H is a subgroup ofG such that, for
all G e G and all H e H, GHG ~l e H, then H is said to be an invariant subgroup
(or sometimes a normal subgroup or a self-conjugate subgroup) of G.
THEOREM 1.2.4. If HisasubgroupofG thenH is invariant if and only if AH = HA
for all A e G; that is, if and only if all right and left cosets coincide.
Example 1.2.15. An immediate result from Theorem 1.2.4 is that all subgroups
of index 2 are invariant subgroups. In particular, we see from Example 1.2.13 that
G\ is invariant in G2
6.
DEFINITION 1.2.11. Inner automorphism. The mapping ft from G onto itself
such that fiG = BGB l for all G e G (and where B is a fixed element of G) is an
automorphism, and an automorphism produced by conjugation in this way is called
an inner automorphism (all others being called outer automorphisms).
Example 1.2.16. All automorphisms of Gg are inner. Indeed it can soon be veri-
fied from Example 1.2.4 and Table 1.1 that p corresponds to conjugation by P and <p
corresponds to conjugation by Q.
THEOREM 1.2.5. A subgroup H ofG is an invariant subgroup if and only if H is in-
variant under all inner automorphisms ofG.
THEOREM 1.2.6. A subgroup H of G is invariant if and only if H is composed of
entire conjugacy classes of G.
