SYMMETRY AND THE SOLID STATE 
3
Krystallsysteme und Krystallstructur (Schonflies 1891). A letter from Schonflies to
Fedorov, quoted by Burckhardt (1967), reads 'I express my great joy about the
agreement with your own views; I am particularly pleased, because I am no longer
alone with my theory; it will still take great efforts before we shall succeed in winning
over the crystallographers. I concede you the priority with pleasure, it is of no primary
importance to me.' A convenient detailed list of the space groups in modern notation
can be found in Volume 1 of the International tables for X-ray crystallography (Henry
and Lonsdale 1965). At the present time there are about 9000 compounds whose
space groups have been identified (for recent lists see Donnay, Donnay, Cox,
Kennard, and King (1963), Nowacki, Edenharter, and Matsumoto (1967), and
Wyckoff (1963, 1964, 1965, 1966, 1968)). The discovery of the two-dimensional space
groups, which are also listed in detail in Volume 1 of the International tables for
X-ray crystallography, is lost in the mists of antiquity because they arose in practice,
in many different civilizations, in the designs of wallpapers or tiled floors (see, for
example, Coxeter and Moser (1965), p. 33).
Although studies of a vast number of crystal structures had been undertaken by
X-ray methods and these crystals had been assigned to the appropriate space groups,
the study of the theory of symmetry seemed not to advance very much, after the
derivation of the 230 space groups in about 1890, until Shubnikov in 1951 published
a book called Symmetry and anti-symmetry of finite figures (in Russian, though this
work is now translated into English, together with a list of many references to other
works of Shubnikov (Shubnikov and Belov 1964)). A review of the developments in
the theory of symmetry over the last 50 years is given by Koptsik (1967a) and a brief
biography of A. V. Shubnikov is given at the beginning of volume 2 of Kristallografiya
(Soviet Phys. Crystallogr. (English transl.) (1957)). The new developments were con-
nected with introducing an operation of anti-symmetry. The classical theory of sym-
metry, point groups, Bravais lattices, and space groups, was essentially a 3-dimensional
study, that is, a point P would be specified by the vector r { = (x, y, z)}, and we
would consider the effect of symmetry operations on this point. Shubnikov's basic
idea was to say that in addition to the ordinary coordinates x, y, and z of a point we
now also give each point a fourth coordinate, s, which can only take one of two pos-
sible values. The coordinate s can be the spin of a particle and the two allowed values
will then correspond to spin up and spin down. Or, in purely abstract terms, they may
be two colours such as black and white. If we include the coordinate s and if the
values of s for the various atoms are randomly specified then the symmetry of the
lattice has been completely destroyed. But if the spins are all parallel to a particular
direction or if they are arranged in some regular fashion it is possible for some fraction
of the symmetry to survive. If we introduce a new operation, which we may calHhe
operation of anti-symmetry, 3%, and consider this in conjunction with all the ordinary
point-group and space-group operations it is possible to obtain a whole collection of
new point groups and space groups which are called black and white groups, or
