26 
SYMMETRY AND THE SOLID STATE
through the centres of the faces of the prism and half through the mid-points of the
edges, and when n is odd each secondary axis passes both through the centre of a face
and through the mid-point of the opposite edge. In the Schonflies notation the n
rotations about the principal axis are labelled as in the cyclic group of order n, and a
rotation about a secondary axis Op is denoted by C2p.
(iii) The tetrahedral group
The tetrahedral group consists of all the rotations that transform a regular tetra-
hedron into itself. It is denoted by 23 in the international notation and by T in the
Schonflies notation. This group has four axes of order 3 passing through the vertices
of the tetrahedron, and three axes of order 2 that join the mid-points of its opposite
edges. The three axes of order 2 form a right triad and are therefore conveniently
labelled Ox, Oy, and Oz. If we denote the vertices of the tetrahedron by 1, 2, 3, and
4 then the four axes of order 3 are labelled 01, 02, 03, and 04 (see Fig. 1.3). Using the
Schonflies notation, as described above, the 12 elements of 23 (T) are therefore
E (the identity), C^ (j = 1, 2, 3, and 4) and C2m (m = x, y, and z).
(iv) The octahedral group
The octahedral or cubic group consists of all the pure rotations that transform a
cube into itself. It is denoted by 432 (sometimes abbreviated to 43) in the international
notation and by O in the Schonflies notation. A regular tetrahedron 1234 can be
inscribed in the cube so that its four vertices lie at four corners of the cube; in this
way the elements of the cubic group can be related to the elements of the tetrahedral
group—indeed 23 (T) is a subgroup of 432 (O). The axes 01, 02, 03, and 04 are still
of order 3, but now the axes Ox, Oy, and Oz are of order 4. There are in addition
six axes of order 2 which join the mid-points of opposite edges of the cube and which
we denote, as in Fig. 1.3, by Oa, Ob, Oc, Od, Oe, and Of. Using the Schonflies notation
the 24 elements of 432 (O) are therefore E, C^ (j = 1, 2, 3, and 4), C%m (m = x, y,
and z), C2m (m = x, y, and z), and C2p (p = a, b, c, d, e, and/).
(v) The icosahedral group
The icosahedral group consists of all rotations that transform either a pentagonal
dodecahedron or a regular cosahedron into itself. It has six axes of order 5, 10 axes of
order 3, and 15 axes of order 2 and it consists therefore of 60 elements (Cohan 1958,
Cotton 1963). This group is denoted by 532 in the international notation and by Y in
the Schonflies notation.
If we denote by T (or C,) the group consisting of the identity E and the inversion /,
then given a proper point group P it is always possible to construct the outer direct
product P (x) T (or P (x) C;), as explained in Definition 1.2.13. This process leads to
a new set of point groups that are subgroups of 0(3). These point groups, for which
we give the international notation followed in brackets by its Schonflies equivalent,
are as follows:
