DEFINITION 1.2.18. Holomorph. The group G A A(G) is called the holomorph
ofG.
Example 1.2.24. The holomorph of G\ is isomorphic with G\. (Indeed every
semi-direct product is isomorphic with a subgroup of the holomorph of the invariant
subgroup out of which the semi-direct product is formed.) This follows because
Gj* = G\ A G2 and G2 is isomorphic with A(G^).
In some of the examples given above the reasoning is omitted or abbreviated. The
reader is recommended to fill in the gaps and to convince himself where statements
are made that seem to require further explanation.
1.3. Group representations
We now move on from the abstract theory of groups described in section 1.2 to
the more specialized topic of group representations, for our main concern in this
book is with the representations of groups that appear in the study of solids and not
with the development of the abstract theory of groups. It is true that for pure mathe-
maticians there are interesting topics from more advanced abstract group theory,
such as the theory of central extensions and cohomology groups, which throw con-
siderable light on the groups in which we are interested; but in a book for applied
mathematicians and theoretical physicists a study of these would be a long and
perhaps indigestible digression. In this section we continue to give some elementary
definitions and theorems, illustrated again, where possible, by examples using the
group Gl.
DEFINITION 1.3.1. Matrix group. A matrix group A is a group of non-singular
matrices. If all the matrices of the group are unitary then it is said to be a unitary
matrix group.
In what follows we shall be concerned with matrix groups of finite order and with
matrices of finite dimension.
DEFINITION 1.3.2. Equivalence. Two matrices D[ and D2 are said to be con-
jugate if there exists a non-singular matrix S such that D[ = SD2S~'.
Two matrix groups A: and A2 are said to be equivalent if there exists a non-singular
matrix S such that A: = SA2S~:. Note that the matrices of the two groups not only
have to be conjugate in pairs but that the conjugation must be produced by using
the same matrix S for all pairs. This is a very strong condition, so strong that it
follows immediately that Aj and A2 must be isomorphic. The converse is not true
(1.2.6)
SYMMETRY AND THE SOLID STATE 
15
Let G be a group and A(G) its group of automorphisms. Then it is always possible
to form the semi-direct product G A A(G). It consists of ordered pairs (G, a) with
G e G and a e A(G) and with the product defined by
